# RSE TRE Community Quarterly Meeting (June 2023)

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 1
:hidden: true

opensafely
project-maintenance
project-cost-recovery
project-federated-analytics
project-tre-fragmentation
breakout-tre-community
breakout-data-pipelines
breakout-tre-accreditation
breakout-federation-standards
```

**Date**: June 28th June 2023 13:30 - 17:00

## Useful links

- **JISC Mailing list**: https://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/cgi-bin/wa-jisc.exe?SUBED1=RSE-TRE-COMM&A=1
- **Slack channel**: https://ukrse.slack.com/archives/C045ETUPPD0
- **Report from last meeting**: https://rse-tre-community.readthedocs.io/en/latest/events/wg_workshops/2023-03-29-march-meeting/index.html
- **Newcastle Commitment**: https://rse-tre-community.readthedocs.io/en/latest/newcastle-commitment/index.html
- **Community GitHub**: https://github.com/rse-tre/community
- **Mentimeter**: https://www.menti.com/algf3akq4q6g
- **Read the docs**: https://rse-tre-community.readthedocs.io/en/latest/structure/index.html

## Schedule

| Time          | Agenda item                          | Presenters                                                                                     | Notes                                                                                                                  |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 13:30 - 13:40 | Introduction                         | Hari Sood (Turing)                                                                             | Introduction to day & community                                                                                        |
| 13:40 - 13:50 | Working group updates                | Hari Sood (Turing), Simon Li (Dundee), Fergus McDonald (DARE), Will Crocombe (RISG Consulting) | Updates from WGs on what they've done for the last 3 months, and what they're doing next                               |
| 13:50 - 14:00 | Community announcements              | All                                                                                            | A chance for anyone in the community to share announcements/updates with everybody else                                |
| 14:00 - 14:30 | OpenSAFELY                           | Seb Bacon (Bennett Institute)                                                                  | [Notes](opensafely)                                                                                                    |
| 14:30 - 14:55 | Project workshops 1                  | Breakout rooms                                                                                 | Room 1: [Maintenance burden and its impact on TRE development](project-maintenance) (Jim Madge)                        |
|               |                                      |                                                                                                | Room 2: [A rigorous and fair cost recovery process](project-cost-recovery) (David Sarmiento Perez)                     |
| 14:55 - 15:00 | Project workshops 1 shareout         | Hari Sood (Turing)                                                                             |                                                                                                                        |
| 15:00 - 15:25 | Project workshops 2                  | Breakout rooms                                                                                 | Room 1: [Problems with multiple technology solutions for federated analytics](project-federated-analytics) (Tom Giles) |
|               |                                      |                                                                                                | Room 2: [Unifying approaches to TRE fragmentation](project-tre-fragmentation) (Aida Sanchez)                           |
| 15:25 - 15:30 | Project workshops 2 shareout         | Hari Sood (Turing)                                                                             |                                                                                                                        |
| 15:30 - 15:40 | Break & vote on breakout discussions |                                                                                                |                                                                                                                        |
| 15:40 - 15:45 | Breakout discussion poll             | Hari Sood (Turing)                                                                             | Determining which topics to cover in the breakout discussions                                                          |
| 15:45 - 16:10 | Breakout discussions 1               | Breakout rooms                                                                                 | Room 1: [UK TRE community direction](breakout-tre-community)                                                           |
|               |                                      |                                                                                                | Room 2: [Data pipelines for ingress/analysis within a TRE](breakout-data-pipelines)                                    |
| 16:10 - 16:15 | Breakout discussions 1 shareout      | Hari Sood (Turing)                                                                             |                                                                                                                        |
| 16:15 - 16:40 | Breakout discussions 2               | Breakout rooms                                                                                 | Room 1: [TRE accreditation](breakout-tre-community)                                                                    |
|               |                                      |                                                                                                | Room 2: [Federation standards](breakout-federation-standards)                                                          |
| 16:40 - 16:45 | Breakout discussions 2 shareout      | Hari Sood (Turing)                                                                             |                                                                                                                        |
| 16:45 - 17:00 | Wrap up & Working Group breakouts    | Hari Sood (Turing)                                                                             |                                                                                                                        |

## Breakout rooms possible topics

- Steps towards a shared understanding for TREs
- How to bring more members of the public into this community
- Anonymisation of / working with unstructured text in TREs

## Notes

### Introduction

- Is RSE Con hybrid?
  - Currently mornings are but figuring out how to facilitate other sessions

### Working group update notes

- Funding / Sustainability WG:

  - Putting together position paper on behalf of UK TRE Community
  - Collecting use-cases for TREs
  - Cost recovery models - see access policy for cost recovery model (cohort study): http://www.bristol.ac.uk/media-library/sites/alspac/documents/researchers/data-access/ALSPAC_Access_Policy.pdf - cost recovery is based on operating costs of data access team

- Information Governance:
  - Meeting on 6th June: discussed IG standards i.e. ingress/egress processes, risk tiering, aligning with existing standards

#### Questions and comments

- Is this community then trying to define what a TRE is?
  - 5 safes have helped regulatory standards i.e in NHS - but they are a bit vague
- If anyone has knowledge of cost recovery models for TREs - please get in contact with Fergus from DARE

#### Community announcements

- SATRE Project - DARE funded project to bring to together a community-led standard for TRE architecture. We welcome new community members :smiley:
  - You are all invited to our collaboration cafes - [Schedule Here](https://hackmd.io/GI5EZQouTYuGhkYBSBYHmQ)
  - GH Repo https://github.com/sa-tre/satre-specification

### Keynote presentation: OpenSAFELY

- [Notes](opensafely)
